Sansad Bhavan[edit]
Sansad Bhavan or the Parliament of India is a circular building designed by the British architects Sir Edwin Lutyens and Sir Herbert Baker in 1912–1913. Construction began in 1921, and in 1927 the building was opened as the home of the Council of State, the Central Legislative Assembly, and the Chamber of Princes.

Rashtrapati Bhavan[edit]
Built with a mix of European and Mughal/Indian styles, Rashtrapati Bhavan was originally built for the Governor General of India. Inaugurated in 1931 as the Viceregal Lodge, the name was changed in 1959 after India became a republic. Now it is the Presidential Palace of India.

Connaught Place[edit]
Connaught Place is a business and commercial centre with hotels, shopping complexes, and offices. Tourist attractions include Hanuman Mandir, an ancient temple with a mention in Guinness Book of Record, Jantar Mantar, an astronomical observatory from the 18th century, Maharaja Agrasen ki Baoli and State Emporiums which houses a collection of ethnic specialties of the states.

Connaught Place is divided into two circles, called the inner and outer Connaught circle.

Lodhi Gardens[edit]
Lodhi Gardens, once called Lady Willingdon Park, it might have been laid out in 1930 and this beautiful park might contais 15th and 16th century monuments that are scattered among its well-kept lawns, flowers, shady trees and ponds. During the early morning and evening hours, the sprawling garden is a favourite spot for fitness freaks and those in search of solitude.

Sikandar Lodi's tomb[edit]
Tomb of Sikandar Lodi was built in 1518 CE by Ibrahim Lodi. The tomb is situated in the Lodhi Gardens.

Bara Gumbad[edit]
Bara Gumbad is an ancient monument grouped together with the Friday mosque (Jama Masjid) and "mehman khana" (guest house) of Sikandar Lodi located in the Lodi Gardens in Delhi.

Shisha Gumbad[edit]
Shisha Gumbad is a tomb from last lineage of the Lodhi Dynasty and was constructed between 1489-1517 CE. Shisha Gumbad (glass dome) houses tomb of an unknown person from the Lodhi family.
